***Meaning*** :: <u>V</u>isual <u>F</u>light <u>R</u>ules

From [[CFI PRO-TIPS]]
> Visual Flight 
Rules are common operating procedures to 
manage risk, select courses of action, and 
evaluate behavior. The most important 
underlying assumption (and part of the 
legal requirement) of VFR is that we can 
look out the window and see stuff (Visual 
Meteorological Conditions), especially the 
ground. Suppose we can't look out the 
window and see anything or only a few 
things (Instrument Meteorological 
Conditions). In that case, the same rules 
won't work to successfully manage risk, 
select courses of action, and evaluate 
behavior. While that's obvious to us, the 
implications aren't necessarily obvious to 
someone approaching VFR and IFR for the 
first time. This difference affects almost 
everything we do, including; preflight 
planning and inspection, what equipment 
we have, legal requirements, navigation, 
communication, flying traffic pattern, 
avoiding other traffic, which routes we 
plan, where we fly, the control inputs we 
use to fly, the risks involved in our flight, 
etc. ad nauseam.

#acronym