---
cssclass: lesson
tags: ppl, lesson
ground-hr: 0.5
local-dual-hr: 1.0
datasheet: "[[C172S Datasheet]]"
---
### Objective
Develop knowledge, risk management and skills associated with spins, flight situations where unintentional spins may occur, and procedures for recovery from unintentional spins.

### References
- [[AC 61-67C]]
- [[General Aviation Pilot Stall Awareness Training Study]]
- [[AFH Ch5]]
- [[PHAK Ch5]]
- [[POH]]
- [[Private Pilot ACS]] Sec VII-D, 

### Builds On
[[3. Maneuvering During Slow Flight]]

### Schedule
`= this.ground-hr + " hour" + choice(this.ground-hr <= 1,"","s")` ground, `= this.local-dual-hr + " hour" + choice(this.local-dual-hr <= 1,"","s")` flight

### Lesson Elements 
1. Aerodynamics of spins
	1. Spins are stalls, but with one wing "more stalled" than the other, causing rapid autorotation and descent. The nose may be pointing near the ground, but angle of attack is high, airspeed is slow, and descent rate is moderate.
	2. At spin entry, trying to lift the down wing with aileron deepens the stall and accelerates stall entry!
	3. Relationship to [[CG]] -- If CG is too far aft (e.g. aft of utility category limits) spin may not be recoverable!
	4. An altitude loss of approximately 500 feet per each 3-second autorotation ("turn") can be expected in most small aircraft
2. What aircraft are approved for spins?
	1. Check [[POH]]. Some airplanes are approved for spins in utility category (e.g. C152, C172, Citabria) but many are not.
	2. Normal category planes are test to recover from 1-turn spin only. Any spin further than 1 turn may not be recoverable!
	3. Note: Parachutes are NOT required for spin training. See FitzpatrickSpartan College interpretation from FAA Chief Counsel in Feb 2018.
3. Situations where unintentional spins may occur
	1. The classic: Skidding base-to-final turn
	2. Trying to stretch a power-off glide
	3. Climb-out stall that develops into spin (lots of P-factor during takeoff climb)
	4. Iced up airframe
4. Spin Recovery Procedure
	1. [[PARE]] - Power Off - Ailerons neutral - Rudder opposite rotation - Elevator stick/yoke forward briskly. Then, neutralize rudder and recover from dive.
5. Practicing Spins and Recoveries
	1. Before departure
		1. Confirm aircraft W&B in utility/acrobatic category approved for spins
		2. Secure interior - no loose objects
	2. Discuss nervousness/anxiety about spins. They can be anxiety-inducing, but are very safe and controlled if procedure is followed!
	3. Select altitude to recover above 3000', typically 4500' or above
	4. Check traffic with clearing turns
	5. Configure and perform power-off stall (no flaps), stick full aft
	6. As stall breaks, add full rudder in desired direction of spin
	7. Hold full aft elevator and full rudder for desired number of turns in spin
	8. Recover with PARE procedure described above
	9. Pull up from dive and add power to regain altitude as necessary
6. Common errors
	1. Failure to configure aircraft properly (e.g. spinning with flaps down, since recover may exceed flap limit speed)
	2. Failure to hold full stall, resulting in a steep spiral and high airspeed
	3. Improper use of controls during recovery, especially neutral ailerons (instinct is to lift the low wing with ailerons)
	4. Disorientation, and "freezing" during the spin
	5. Recovering from dive too abruptly, causing secondary stall
	6. Spinning an airplane not approved for spins, or out of utility limits. This could be fatal!

### Completion Standards
The client must have the ability to assess and avoid situations where intentional spins may occur, and must be able to explain (and optionally demonstrate) procedures to recover from unintentionally spins.

### Required Homework
 None. 

### Recommended Homework
None. 

*Return to [[~ PPL Lesson Plan Outline|Table of Contents]]^*