---
cssclass: lesson
tags: ppl, lesson
ground-hr: 1.5
local-dual-hr: 0
datasheet: "[[C172S Datasheet]]"
---
### Objective
Develop knowledge of all abnormal and emergency procedures for the training aircraft in use, including all ACS risk management and skill tasks.

### References
- [[AFH Ch18]]
- [[AIM 6]]
- [[AFM]]/[[POH]]
- [[Private Pilot ACS]] Section IX

### Builds On
- [[14. Emergency Landings]]

### Schedule
`= this.ground-hr + " hour" + choice(this.ground-hr <= 1,"","s")` ground, flight practice as necessary

### Lesson Elements
1. [[FAR 91.3 PIC Responsibility and Authority]]
3. What is an emergency? When should you declare one?
	1. When the outcome of the flight is in doubt
6. Engine failures
	1. During flight: see [[14. Emergency Landings]]
	2. During takeoff roll
	3. Immediately after takeoff: Land straight ahead!
7. Systems and equipment malfunctions
	2. Electrical malfunctions or complete failure
	3. Minimum fuel
	4. Engine fire
		1. In air - [[Maneuver - Emergency Descent]] (this is the rapid descent procedure)
		2. During start on ground
	5. Flap failure
	6. Retractable gear malfunction
8. Unsafe Conditions
	1. [[VFR]] into [[IMC]]
	2. Icing
9. Emergency equipment and survival gear
10. Emergency squawk codes: [[Squawk 7700]], [[Squawk 7600]], [[Squawk 7500]]
> [!caution] Even passing through one of these codes will trigger an alert for [[ATC]]. As you set a squawk code, be mindful to not pass through on accidentally.
8. Common errors
	1. Failure to use flow patterns or memory items
	2. Failure to use checklists, or improper use

### Completion Standards
Client demonstrates appropriate knowledge of aircraft systems, abnormal and emergency procedures, and the ability to perform emergency procedures to ACS standards.

### Required Homework
- [ ] Memorize emergency flows (you may wish to rent an aircraft and practice on the ground, although a picture also works)

### Recommended Homework
- [ ] Chair fly all emergencies in [[POH]]

*Return to [[~ PPL Lesson Plan Outline|Table of Contents]]^*