---
cssclass: lesson
tags: ppl, lesson
ground-hr: 1
local-dual-hr: 1
---
### Objective
Complete the [[FAR 61.87 Student Pilot Solo Reqs]] required pre-solo knowledge test, ensure pre-solo documentation is filed, and identify any remaining areas for practice.

### References
- West Valley Flying Club Solo Phase Check

### Builds On
All pre-solo lessons

### Schedule
`= this.ground-hr + " hour" + choice(this.ground-hr <= 1,"","s")` ground, `= this.local-dual-hr + " hour" + choice(this.local-dual-hr <= 1,"","s")` flight

### Lesson Elements
1. Documentation and paperwork
	1. Logbook & Endorsement [[Pre-Solo Endorsements]]
	2. Student Pilot Certificate [[FAR Part 61.3 Cert and Rating Reqs]], [[FAR 61.85 Student Application]]
	3. Government Issued ID [[FAR Part 61.3 Cert and Rating Reqs]]
	4. Medical Certificate [[FAR 61.113]] 
		1. #todo :: Make sure medical cert is addressed in earlier lesson homework
2. [[FAR 61.87 Student Pilot Solo Reqs]]
	1. Knowledge Test
		1. Sample Questions
			1. Regulations
				1. Who is responsible for determining aircraft airworthiness?
				2. What are the fuel reserves required for VFR day and night flights?
				3. What are the alcohol requirements relative to flight?
				4. What are [[VFR]] weather minimums at the airport? What about in the airspace of the practice area?
				5. What are the limitations on visibility that apply specifically to student pilots?
			2. Airspace
				1. What airspace exists at the surface of this airport?
				2. What is pattern altitude?
				3. Where are the practice areas located?
				4. What equipment is required to enter this airport's airspace?
				5. Can you fly in Class B airspace? What about Class C?
			3. Aircraft
				1. What type of fuel does the aircraft use?
				2. How many fuel drains are there? Where?
				3. Why are there two magnetos?
				4. What are the various V-speeds?
				5. What are the procedures for an engine failure?
				6. What limitations has your instructor put on solo flight?
	2. Pre-Solo Flight Training
		1. Received and logged flight training for the maneuvers and procedures...
		2. Demonstrated satisfactory proficiency and safety...
3. [[FAR 61.89 Student Pilot Limitations]]
4. Logging Solo Flight Time - FAR 61.51 
   > [!quote] A student pilot may log pilot-in-command time when the student pilot (i) Is the sole occupant of the aircraft; (ii) Has a solo flight endorsement as required under [[FAR 61.87 Student Pilot Solo Reqs]]; and (iii) Is undergoing training for a pilot certificate or rating.

### Bonus Content
#todo :: Additional Content to be Added to Pre-Solo Lessons:
1. Regulations
	1. [[FAR 91.107 Use of Seat Belts]]
	2. Airworthiness (who determines, who is responsible for)
		1. Who is responbile for maintaining aircraft in airworthy condition? Owner or Operator - [[FAR 91.403]]
		2. Who determines airworthiness? Pilot-In-Command - [[FAR 91.7]]
	3. Read through [[FAR 91.123 Compliance with ATC]]
2. Operations
	1. [[Categorical Outlooks]]
	2. POH sections and what is in them
		1. Part of [[PHAK Ch9]]
		2. (currently have a request to read in [[6. Normal and Crosswind Takeoffs and Climbs]] and [[14. Emergency Landings]])
	3. Standard Phraseology - https://wiki.flightgear.org/ATC_phraseology
		1. [[AIM 4-2]]
		2. Student pilot identification
		3. Few you may hear
			1. Roger - I heard (although typically you will just say your N-number instead)
			2. Wilco - I heard and will comply, when a readback is not needed
			3. Affirmative / Negative - Yes/No
			4. (No) Contact - I (do not) have the aircraft in sight
			5. Say Again - Please repeat
			6. Standby - Please wait, and there's no need to acknowledge this standby
			7. Unable, *reason* - I cannot do that request because of *reason*
4. Aircraft
	1. Refilling oil - See [[POH]] and club policies
	2. Roll out of turn at 1/2 of bank
	3. [[Four Left Turning Tendencies]]
	4. [[Static vs Dynamic Stability and How Trainer Planes Are Designed]]
	5. [[Leaning the Mixture]]
5. Rest of syllabus

### Completion Standards
Client has completed pre-solo knowledge test and received all necessary endorsements (beyond solo endorsement).

### Required Homework
- [ ] Read the relevant part 61 FARs

### Recommended Homework
- [ ] Review past lessons
- [ ] Review pre-solo ground school content

*Return to [[~ PPL Lesson Plan Outline|Table of Contents]]^*