---
cssclass: lesson
tags: ppl, lesson
---
### Objective
Develop knowledge of towered airport traffic patterns, skill and judgement in approaching and departing various types of patterns, and good procedures while flying the pattern. Additionally develop knowledge, risk management, and skills associated with go-around or rejected landing, with emphasis on landing conditions that may require a go-around.

### References
- [[AFH Ch8]]
- [[AIM 4-3]]
- [[Private Pilot ACS]] Sec III

### Builds On
- [[5. Towered Airport Operations]]
- [[7. Ground Reference Maneuvers]]

### CFI Equipment
GPS/Sentry/ADS-B In

### Schedule
1-hour ground, 1.5 hours flight

### Lesson Elements
1. Finding entry procedures and pattern information
	1. Sectionals
	2. Chart Supplements
	3. ForeFlight
	4. Airport website for noise abatement or other procedures
2. General traffic patterns
	1. [[Left Traffic Pattern.jpeg]]
	2. Five named legs
	3. Typically left traffic (meaning making left turns)
3. Towered Airport (Palo Alto traffic procedures as example)
	1. Pattern altitude: 800' on east side, 1000' on west side
	2. Entering Pattern
		1. Visual Reporting points for calling in to KPAO, SLAC, Woodside VOR, Windy Hill, Leslie Salt, Coyote Hills, Sunol Pass, etc....
		2. Approaching from west: maintain 1500' until crossing 101 freeway
	3. Leaving the Pattern
		1. Common departures: Left and Right Dumbarton, 270 overhead
	4. Flying the pattern 
		1. Standard Right Traffic for runway 31, turn right 10 degrees after departure for noise abatement
		2. Memorize power settings/airspeeds, use wind correction angle like [[Maneuver - Rectangular Course|rectangular course]]
4. Go-Arounds
	1. Situations requiring a go-around.
		1. Be prepared constantly for go-around. Every landing is a potential go-around! Go-around sooner, rather than later. Don't let things get out of hand!
		2. Too high to land in first third of runway
		3. Traffic on runway, or instruction from tower to go-around
		4. Unstable final approach
		5. Possibility of wake turbulence
		6. Wind shear or gusty crosswind
		7. Bounced landing, or ballooning during flare
	2. Go-around procedure
		1. **Stop the Descent**: Full power (throttle and prop), smooth but rapid, carb heat off
		2. Accelerate to Vx
		3. Immediatly
		4. Pitch to Vx or Vy climb attitude by visual reference to horizon
		5. Immediately retract flaps to climb setting
		6. Accelerate to Vx or Vy
		7. Trim for Vx or Vy
		8. Verify positive rate of climb, then retract gear
		9. Set flaps for normal climb
		10. Check cowl flaps open
		11. Report go-around to tower (Aviate, Navigate, then Communicate)
		12. Use take-off check-list
	3. Common Errors
		1. Initiating go-around too late
		2. Too slow power application, leaving carb heat on
		3. Improper pitch attitude, causing touch down or porpoise
		4. Lack of rudder usage to correct for P-factor and torque
		5. Drifting from runway centerline (unless offsetting for conflicting traffic)
		6. Forgetting checklist items (flaps, carb heat, cowl flaps)
5. Power and Airspeed for 
6. Other safety concerns
	1. Collision Avoidance
		1. [[Right of Way Rules]]
		2. Awareness of other operations, such as parachuting
	2. [[Wake turbulence]] from helicopters, and heavy aircraft
	3. [[Windshear]] avoidance
7. Common Errors
	1. Lack of planning ahead, staying ahead of the airplane
	2. Lack of situation awareness or awareness of other traffic
	3. Improper radio usage, forgetting radio calls at non-towered airports

### Completion Standards
Client must demonstrate proficiency at planning and flying pattern approaches and departures, at towered and non-towered airports, complying with AIM recommended procedures, maintaining awareness of and proper spacing from other aircraft. Maintain traffic pattern altitude ±100 feet, and airspeed ±10 knots (or mph).

### Required Homework

- [ ] Memorize power settings/airspeeds for pattern #TODO add these for C152/C172/PA28/DA40
- [ ] Read Chart Supplement for KPAO

### Recommended Homework 
- [ ] Chair fly traffic pattern entry

*Return to [[~ PPL Lesson Plan Outline|Table of Contents]]^*