---
cssclass: lesson
tags: ppl, lesson
---
### Objective
Develop knowledge, risk management, and skills associated with go-around or rejected landing, with emphasis on landing conditions that may require a go-around.

### References
[[Private Pilot ACS]] Sec IV N, AFH Ch8, POH

### Builds On
[[10. Normal and Crosswind Approaches and Landings]]

### Schedule
Ground 0.5, multiple flights to practice this maneuver frequently

### Lesson Elements
1. Situations requiring a go-around.
	1. Be prepared constantly for go-around. Every landing is a potential go-around! Go-around sooner, rather than later. Don't let things get out of hand!
	2. Too high to land in first third of runway
	3. Traffic on runway, or instruction from tower to go-around
	4. Unstable final approach
	5. Possibility of wake turbulence
	6. Wind shear or gusty crosswind
	7. Bounced landing, or ballooning during flare
2. Go-around procedure ([[5 C's (Going Missed)]])
	1. Full power (throttle and prop), smooth but rapid, carb heat off
	2. Pitch to Vx or Vy climb attitude by visual reference to horizon
	3. Immediately retract flaps to climb setting
	4. Accelerate to Vx or Vy
	5. Trim for Vx or Vy
	6. Verify positive rate of climb, then retract gear
	7. Set flaps for normal climb
	8. Check cowl flaps open
	9. Report go-around to tower (Aviate, Navigate, then Communicate)
	10. Use take-off check-list
3. Common Errors
	1. Initiating go-around too late
	2. Too slow power application, leaving carb heat on
	3. Improper pitch attitude, causing touch down or porpoise
	4. Lack of rudder usage to correct for P-factor and torque
	5. Drifting from runway centerline (unless offsetting for conflicting traffic)
	6. Forgetting checklist items (flaps, carb heat, cowl flaps)

### Completion Standards
Client must demonstrate judgement about when to initiate go-around, and meet ACS skill standards. Maintain takeoff power and proper climb configuration at Vx or Vy, +10/-0 knots.

### Required Homework
 None.

### Recommended Homework 
- [ ] Chair fly go-arounds

*Return to [[~ PPL Lesson Plan Outline|Table of Contents]]^*